Ending the Moscow church schism of 1467-1560: story's fina;e in documents

Introduction

The basis for the schism of the church of Moscow lies in the events of 1441-1467, when it ended its subordinate relationship with the Patriarchate of Constantinople, and broke the canonical communion with the rest of the Orthodox world. This was a beginning of a long period of isolation of the Muscovite kingdon, a state of things which would persist until 1560-1561, when the mitropolis of  Moscow would separate from that of Kiev, and return under the omophorion of the Patriarch of Constatntinople; a point of ending its unlawful autocephaly. Canonical autocephaly will be granted Moscow only in 1590, together with the status of patriarchate, through a council held in Constantinople.

Below we will focus on the events of 1557-1561 and their immediate prehistory. Diplomatic documents and patriarchal chaters will serve as our primary sources - the chosen kind of sources of Igor Pavlovich Medvedev. Dedicating this article to his anniversary is for us a joy and a great honor.


2. Moscow schism before the inthronization of Ioann IV

Metropolitan Jonas, installed to the see of Moscow in 1446, retained both his title of the Metropolitan of Kiev, and his formal subordination to the patriarch of Constantinople.

After Jonas reposed in 1461, Theodosius (Byval'tsev) became a new metropolitan, as per the will left by Jonas, presumably retaining "Kiev" in his title. The following confirmation of his title by the patriarch in Constantinope was implied, but never actuality happened. In 1464 Theodosius voluntarily left the cathedra, under the pretext of illness. Next metropolitan, Philippe, was appointed without any attempts to legitimacy. Mitropolis of Kiev is still one, but as for the metropolitans appointed in Moscow over the remaining part of XV century, starting with Philippe, there's no data on their formal titles. Among the documents which preserved to our times the only title mentioned is the unofficial "metropolitan of all Russia", without a name of the particular city; using an official title would point out an inconsistency.

De facto, communion with the patriarchs in Constantinople never resumed after the repose of metropolitan Jonas. Not surprising, then, is the fact that after the repentance of Gregory the Bulgarian, Uniate metropolitan of Kiev, he alone was reinstated as the lawful metropolitan of the see of Kiev in 1466. This was followed by a diplomatic exchange between Constantinople, Vilno and Moscow, on the subject of Moscow's acceptance of the canonical appointment of metropolitan Gregory. The results of that exchange followed shortly. In the beginning of 1467, hierarchy of Moscow was already deposed by patriarch Dionisios as one in the schism. Shortly after (the exact date is not known) Moscow replied by prohibiting the ecclesiastical communion with Constantinople and western parts of the mitropolis of Kiev.

In the very beginning of 1470-s, a new ideology of autocephaly of Moscow started to take shape; it was duly reinforced in 1472 (the translation of the relics) by the cult of metropolitan Jonas as the founder of this autocephaly - a development that Jonas himself, while yet alive, hardly envisioned. Pachomios Logothet, in a panegyric for the said translation, attaches his veneration to the existing cultt of the Three Hierarchs of Moscow - Peter, Kyprian and Photios. In the future, Kyprian and Photios will be replaced by Alexii and Jonas.

De jure, metropolis of Kiev remained united, but now there were two mutually exclusive versions of who is the metropolitan thereof, and where does the power of appointing one reside. De facto, the feeling of autonomy of from Kiev metropolis solidified in Moscow, which manifested in the local title of 'metropolitan of Moscow'. This title became quite established by the time of metropolitan Varlaam (1511-1521), even though we still don't have the evidence of its usage as a formal title during his intronization.

A patriarchal charter to Varlaam from Theoliptus of Constantinople, dated with July 1516, is still using the old title, "metropolitan of Kiev". The authenticity of the Slavonic translation of this letter, however, is questionable, and the original is lost. The charter is linked to the Greek church embassy that delivered it, and this story was heavily redacted in official Russian chronicles. Judging by the "Reconds of Judicial Interrogations of Maximos the Greek and Isaac Sobaka", embassy received a very cold reception, with an emphasis made on the absence of communion with Greeks, while in the official chronicles this is reversed.

The embassy of patriarch Theoliptus was the most serious of the steps attempted since 1467 to bring peaceful resolution to the schism. The result was a fiasco, and led to a life imprisonment for its leader, Maximos the Greek (since his arrest in Moscow in 1525 to his death in 1555/1556 in home confinement in Trinity-St. Sergius Lavra, conditions of his confinement changed, but he never regained his freedom). During that time, the Non-posessors party, that since the end of XV century worked within the Russian church to end its uncanonical status, suffered a complete defeat.

One little researched episode, related to the very beginning of the rule of future king John the Terrible, is the period of the reign of metropolitan Joasaph (1539-1542, † 1555/1556), installed largely as a result of some boyar intrigues, and deposed in the same manner. In his oath of enthronement (the copy is preserved), he swore his allegiance to the patriarch of Constantinople. Joasaph did a lot to improve the conditions of Maximos the Greek, and in general admired his writings, having done a lot to spread them; he ended his days near Maximos, in Trinity-St. Sergius Lavra (they reposed in the same year). At the same time, Joasaph was a staunch enemy of the Josephite party, and have tried, as much as he could, to preserve the church from the influence of Joseph Volotsky. However, there's no evidence of any negotiations with Constantinople. Till the end of his life he was well respected by church and civil authorities, but hardly had any real influence on the church politics. It wouldn't be too much of a stretch to consider his reign an attempt to heal the Moscow's schism - a first such attempt during the reign of Ioann IV.


3. Second attempt to end the Moscow schism during the reign of Ioann IV

Maximos the Greek and the remnants of the Non-posessors party were still alive in 1546-1547, when the question of the Moscow schism was brought up once more - this time, in connection to the transformationist plans of the days of the beginning of the reign of Ioann IV.
It isn't surprising, then, that the name of Maximos the Greek comes up from the very beginning of the process. And to mark this beginning, let's take the address to tsar Ioann IV, compiled at the local council of Constantinople, assembled in June of 1546 for the purpose of the inthronization of new patriarch Dionisios II. This address was signed by the 50 hierarchs of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, includin the patriarch himself, joined by the patriarch Herman of Jerusalem. The formal occasion was to inform Ioann IV of the inthronization of a new patriarch, but it also contained one request - to allow Maximos the Greek to return home. Same request was also contained in an earlier letter from the patriarch Ioachim of Alexandria, dated April 4, 1545, but this new missive had a notable difference: John IV was no longer addressed as "Great Prince", but as "Tsar and Great Prince"; and, as was noted by Dan Muresan, this is half an year before the official crowning of Ioann IV.
Dan Muresan interpreted the councilar encyclical of 1546 as a proposal to start a serious conversation about the unlawful aitocephaly of Moscow - the interest of Maximos the Greek to the same subject was the primary reason for his loss of freedom. Translated from the diplomatic language, the offer made by patriarch Dionisios was as follows: we will recognize you as a tsar of Rus, if you bring the church of Moscow back under obedience to the Constantinople patriarchate; as a sign of your good will, you can let Maximos the Greek go home.
This is where the diplomatic negotiations had begun; though not Maximos the Greek nor Dionisios would live to see their finale, at which Constantinople would be victorious. Ioann IV would give up the autocephaly of Moscow, without receiveing the recognition as a reincarnatiopn of "Basileos Romeon".
The offer, presented by patriarch Dionisios, was understood in Moscow, and was received with certain enthusiasm. By January 1547 Ioann IV was enthroned. Same year Maximos the Greek was transferred from Otroch Monastery in Tver to the Trinity Lavra of St. Sergius; his condition was now better, but in place of freedom he was, as we would call it today, under house arrest. Evidently, negotiations were mean to continue, which necessitateted keeping of Maximos as a hostage. The focus for the negotiations, too, was obvious.
In 1547 an addirion to the protocol of crowning was the inclusion of the lineage of Ioann, traced to August Caesar, with an implied claim to the inheritance of the Byzantine Empire. Therefore, the doctrine of Moscow as a "Third Rome", introduced several years earlier, was made official. Therefore, the demand to the Constantinople patriarchate was more than recognition of Ioann as a Tsar of "all Russia", some remote region of the inhabited world, but the very same King, who is the subject of the "Symphony". Renouncing the claim to autocephaly of Moscow wouldn't be too big of a price to pay, if the other side of the deal would offer the Constantinople patriarchate itself.
But the patriarchate didn't rush with accepting the ambitions of the Tsar in Moscow, and took a time-out. It would seems that there were no new developments between 1547 and Stoglavy Synod of 1551 in the dialog between Moscow and Constatntinople.

Stoglavy Synod (1551) was the next step. In a different work ("в другом месте" ?) I've attempted to present my thoughts on this council as a demostration of self-sufficiency of the church of Moscow: to quote Joseph Volotsky, this council took upon itself the powers to override canons of ecumenical councils. Even the very format - hierarchs answering the questions posed by the king - is a re-enactment of the legends of the First Ecumenical Council (325) and emperor Constanctine. Dan Muresan proposed a different interpretation, based on its 'Article 55', which attributes the highest judical power to the patriarchate of Constantinople. Let's explore this article of Stoglav in a little more detail.
The text of the article consists of two parts; the rule IX of the Fourth Ecumenical Council, which isn't quoted in its entirety, and an interpretation of that rule. The authentic text of the rule IX already mentions the role of patriarch of Constantinople as a highest judical authority, but this concluding part of the rule didn't make it to the text quoted in Stoglav. The interpretation follows, which rephrases the same rule using different words. One could think, following Dan Muresa and other researchers, that the text belongs to the authors of Stoglav, but in truth it is an exact translation of the interpretation by Aristine (XII). Therefore, this is a routine copy of the article of a church law; an article that was, as we know, challenged by Rome, but was not inconsistent with autocephaly, being accepted by all the Eastern patriarchates. The highest judical power of one patriarchate was never understood in the East as a power that blocks the power of self-governance of other churches. Table 1 presents the comparison of the texts of Stoglav with those of Aristine:

======================
If a clergyman has a grievance with another clergyman, it is improper for them to go to the civic court; they should take the matter to their bishop. Should they go to civic court, their ministry would forbidden, according to the rules. And if a clergyman has a grievance against his bishop, once in the appointed time the clergy from the area are assembled together, they should take their case to that council. But if a clergyman or a bishop have a grievance with a metropolitan, they should be judged by the patriarch of their land, who is above all the bishops and metropolitans of that land; or they could go to the patriarch of Constantinople. No other patriarch has the power to judge a metropolitan from a see outside of his land, except the patriarch of Constantinople.
======================


Hence, nothing here shows that Stoglav admitted the primacy of Constantinople over Moscow. On the contrary, it provides an essay on the church law, where the traditional Justinian's "symphony" of church and civil powers is transferred to the "third Rome" (see the Article 62 of Stoglav, quoting Novella VI by Justinian, which gives the definition of the symphony), and, potentially, the transition of the Constantinople patriarchate itself under the sphere of influence of Tsar in Moscow.
Immediately after the Stoglav authorities in Moscow had to step away from the church business. First they were tied up with the Siege of Kazan, and later with its consequence, the Cheremis war. The next chance to return to the church diplomacy will not occur until 1557.


4. Embassy of Theodoret - main objective

Once again, patriarch Dionisios took the lead. In 1556 he sent an embassy to Moscow, with a formal goal to ask of a simple favor - and an informal one, much more ambitious. This hypothesis is supported by the ensuing developments, and also by the fact that Joasaph, metropolitan of Euripus. From that mission and for a long time, he will become a chief envoy in Constantinople's diplonacy with Moscow.
While the embassy was travelling to Moscow, Constantinople had a change of patriarchs; Dionisios reposed in summer of 1556, and Joasaph II replaced him (he will rule without interruptions until his deposition in January 1565). Two namesakes will develop close and trustworthy working relationship.
It appears that patriarch Dionisios was receiving news about the events in Moscow, and so organized the embassy at the time when, once again, Moscow will have time for the church affairs.
In response to the embassy of the metropolitan Joasaph, Moscow not only granted the favor that he sought, but sent a return mission of archimandrite Theodoret (a Non-posessor and hesychast, famous enlightener of Laplanders of Kola Peninsula), who acted in a direct mission from the tsar, without the involvement of the metropolitan of Moscow.
Mission of Theodoret left for Constatntinople in February of 1557, and returned to Moscow on December 2 of the same year. The story of this mission is known from two kinds of sources. First, the diplomtic documents are well-preserved; and second, "Stories of the Grand Duke of Moscow, Andrei Kurbsky" - the part which was essentially a separate book, "Life of Theodoret".
These two kinds of sources very successfully complement each other, like close-ups and long shots. Diplomatic documents provide the close-ups; sometimes so close, that it's difficult to see the forest for the trees. That is consistent with the function of these documents, which are meant to describe the immediate next steps with maximum exactness - but, as much as possible, to hide the strategic targets. Kurbsky, on the other hand, doesn't see the details well, mostly due to a lack of familiarity with the subject matter, and is often confused with what he does see, because he doesn't understand the workings of the church diplomacy. But he knew very well how Theodoret (his spiritual father at the time) understood his mission. They were very close - and at that time, Kurbsky was still not far from the tsar.
Theodoret and Kurbsky both considered their mission of 1557 very successful, its result being the complete overcoming of the schism. Both of them were very uneasy with the split (that feeling led them as far as refusal to accept legitimacy of metropolitan Macarius). If we are to take Kurbsky's words on it, Theodoret considered receiving a blessing from "patriarch, a viceroy of the Apostles" to be a main reward for the success of his mission. Thus, he considered his job of healing the split to be a success, as a schismatic would not receive a blessing; this was his main satisfaction over the mission. Ioann IV had different priorities, and so his assessment of the degree of success of the mission was less enthusiastic.
Below we will analyze aspects of the Theodorite's mission immediately related to the status of the church of Moscow.
Researches who rely solely on the diplomatic documents and general considerations, while neglecting Kurbsky, soon encountered an intractable challenge
: why was it necessary to ask for a patriarchal blessing for a crowning performed ten years prior? Some thought that it wasn't necessary as such, and tzar merely wanted to show his respect to the patriarch (V. Waldenberg); others thought it was necessary to request special blessing for Ioann IV to act as a tsar in Astrakhan and Kazan (N.V. Sinitsyna, A.I. Filiushkin; this idea would have merit, if the subject was a specil wedding in a status of a tzar of Astrakhan and Kazan, not one of Moscow); S. N. Bogatyrev thinks that a blessing was required in order to conduct a second crowning, which, according to his own hypothesis, included an Office of Crismation, omitted in 1547, and presumably conducted at the Stoglav; A. L. Khoroshkevich makes an assumption of Ioann IV having dynastical considerations. In my opinion, the hypothesis closest to the mark was that of N. F. Kapterev, who considered that the need for a patriarchal blessing was due to doctrine of the "Third Rome", but if we consider that a blessing for the crowning actually follows from the conciliar decree of 1546, this explanation becomes far from certain. Kurbsky, on the other hand, provides an exact and direct answer on the matter.
There, we read the following definition for the goal of the Mission: "...sending him [Theodorite] as an envoy to patriarch of Constantinople, asking for a Blessing of Crowning; the same Blessing and Crowning, as that Office wherewith Christian Roman Caesars were crowned by pope and patriarchs".
This formula partially corresponds to the one in the diplomatic document, the secret "memory", issued to Theodorite for the purpose of memorising it by heart, with an instruction to "learn it and tear it out in Smolensk", which is exactly before the crossing the border of the Muscovite state. The remaining document restricted to the official request for a blessing for the crowning. Kurbsky clarifies that the goal is not an ordinary blessing, but a same blessing as a Byzantine Emperor would have received. This would amount to recognition of tsar of Moscow to be a modern incarnation of the "Basileos Romeon". This is exactly what the crowning of 1547 laid a claim on, and what was never ratified by the patriarch of Constantinople.
I don't see a reason to accept the hypothesis by S. N. Bogatyrev of the "second crowning" of Ioann IV at the Stoglav Synod (it can't withstand the Occam's Razor), but we can agree with his intuition regarding the mission's objectives - the embassy from the tsar of Moscow sought the same status for the tsar which Stoglav did claim, a status with a dignity of an Emperor in the traditional Byzantine sense.
Both Theodorite and metropolitan Joasaph of Euripus, who was returning with the same mission, had verbal instructions regarding the charter besought by the tzar; the latter had another special assignment from the tzar, of which we know from a report he wrote and sent to Moscow (see the next chapter). The secret instruction to Theodorite mentioned above provided for three variants in the development of events. The first, in the optimistic case that patriarch provides a letter of the blessing under the name of a council assembled for this specific purpose. That was the format required to conduct the "reformatting" of the ecclesiastic structure of a first among the Orthodox patriarchates, the Constantinople. The second variant was to obtain the same letter, but under the signature of the patriarch alone, rather than a council. The third variant was for the case when the mission failed in its objective to obtain the letter of the blessing. In this case Theodoret could not hurry back to Moscow, and allow himself to undertake a pilgrimage to the holy sites of the Christian East.
In fact, Theodoret did receive some patriarchal charter, and did rush to return to Moscow, obviously considering the mission to be a partial success, according to the second variant of the instructions he received.


5. Embassy of Theodoret -- direct results

The main results of the embassy of Theodoret will be summarized only several years later, when patriarchare of Constantinople will finalize binding documents with regards to the status of Moscow, to which the powers thereof would have no choice but to accede. Direct results of the embassy were the documents which it delivered to Moscow on December 2 of 1557, together with the verbal message that Theodoret had to pass to the tzar.
The embassy delivered three written documents: two patriarchal (not conciliar) letters issued in the summer of 1557, both addressed to the tsar, as well as the letter of Metropolitan Joasaph of Yeuripus with his report on the execution of the royal commission, also addressed to the tsar. The Moscow ecclesiastical authorities (represented by Metropolitan Macarius) are still not perceived as a party to the negotiations (a subject), they are among the topics (objects) under discussion.

The first patriarchal letter touches on the main goal of the embassy only in passing and says the following: "Even so, concerning your royal crowning, received from the most holy metropolitan of all Russia Macarios, our beloved brother and fellow servant, we are well-disposed towards it, and may it dignify your kingdom".
This document confirms only that which was already promised in the conciliar decree of 1546 under the patriarch Dionysius, and that de facto already existed: the crowning of Ioann to the kingdom in his own land, that is, as a regional ruler. Macarius is mentioned without an official title (without a designation of the city), and no one hurries to clarify the canonical meaning of his title as a metropolitan; such a naming can be a simple diplomatic courtesy and generally have no church-canonical meaning. The most important thing is that the direct blessing of the crowning is not contained in this letter: the patriarch only says that he learned about it with satisfaction ("we are well-disposed"), and expresses good wishes on this ("may it dignify to your kingdom "). Such words could later be interpreted in any way.
However, the same charter indicates that an important part of the response is entrusted to Theodoret, to pass verbally: "...Now let everything to be confessed to you by your faithful hieromonk Theodoret, and have faith in him, as your prayerful supplicant, and to the words he will pass onto you."
The second patriarchal charter, the content of which, in general, duplicates that of the first one, was, in my opinion, caused by the fact that even Theodoret, in his naivete in the affairs of church politics, considered the first letter inadequate. Apparently, the verbal patriarchal blessing to the tsar, transmitted through him, alone did not satisfy him, and he insisted on issuing another letter by the patriarch, in which the patriarchal blessing would be formulated explicitly.
The second letter also contains, in even more detail, a reference to the confidential verbal message transmitted with Theodoret, but this time the explicit blessing is present - the only question is, a blessing of what, exactly. Let us explore the text of the letter (Table 2):

======== translating the text in Russian column ==============
"The rest of what your man, Father Theodoret, faithful to you in all things, will tell you, believe him, as an honest hieromonk and your prayerful servant. May the Lord bless the work of the hands of the all-venerable Macarius, metropolitan of Russia, ang grant him many years, as everything he does is fair and God-pleasing".
==================================================

The letter still successfully avoidsnaming Macarius according to his official title (calling him "metropolitan of all Russia", but not "metropolitan of Moscow", or, even morre so, "of Kiev"), but now gives an explicit blessingon what he did. This, of course, narrows the corridor of possible interpretations. Now patriarch won't be able to denounce an act of metropolitan Macarius, but will have to find an appropriate interpretation first. This is an undisputable positive effect of the Theodoret's mission: he managed to silidify the status quo, which up to this point had no guarantees behind it; without this second letter, patriarch still had an option to denounce the crowning of Ioann IV as performed by a schismatic metropolitan. Now, at least, the patriarch had to find something positive in that crowning.

Most likely, the message passed verbally with Theodoret contained a promise to issue soon a counciliar decree, with a blessing of his crowning. This is also supported by the third and last document delivered by the mission - a letter to the tsar from metropolitan of Euripos. Metropolitan gave a report on the completion of his task, where he was to converse with the patriarch: "И молебнику твоему царскому [т.е. патриарху] во всем, еже еси говорил духовне, исправил, все с радостию восприяли, и о том твоем царском деле соборовати не успели, и потом будет собранье архиереиское, и твое царское дело, и грамоты ис собору пришлют, и яз же, молебник твои, с ними же в соборе буду, и дело твое царское совершитца во всем»."

Thus, Theodoret's embassy achieved all the goals given it in Moscow, but only in words and promises. Setting these words in documents remained just that - a promise.
We can also note that both patriarchal missives draw attention to the person of Theodoret. Partially this is a part of the protocol: not including such praises to the personal envoy would serve as a warning that the envoy can not be trusted, while their presence is a neutral sign. Still, both missives hint rather transparently that the content of the message passed verbally with Theodoret is more important than what is committed to the papers. If Theodorite was less ascetical, or more shrewd in political games, he could have suspected that soon he could be a perfect target to be blamed for the possible failure of negotiations.


6. "Counciliar" decree of 1560: concerns of authenticity

After the departure of the embassy from Constantinople, the tactics of the patriarchate on the Moscow problem consisted of delaying the fulfillment of the promises passed with Theodoret. The council wasn't assembling, and indeed, there's no indication that it was even planned - but Moscow was to receive a different version of the story. It remains unknown what prompted patriarch Joasaph to decide in 1560 that it was no longer possible to delay with an answer to Moscow.

The new patriarchal embassy arrived in Moscow only in September 1561. It was led by Metropolitan Ioasaf, with whom we're already acquainted. The history of this embassy, which passed along its way through the lands of the Moldovan hospodar Vasily Lapushnian, and then through the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, is a separate chapter of the history of cultural, political and ecclesiastical ties between Constantinople, the Moldovan principalities, Lithuania and Moscow, which remains understudied. The embassy delivered to Moscow a number of documents, of which only four letters will be of interest to us - and which for the next thirty years will determine the status of the church of Moscow.

The most important of the four charters was issued as a counciliar; the other three were personal, signed by patriarch Joasaph. These three, in essence, were augmenting the counciliar one, and contained important clarifications.

The counciliar charter poses a number of challenges for researchers. As V. V. Regel, its first publisher, promptly noticed, 35 out of 36 signatures of Greek hierarchs on it were forged. Only the signatures of two Joasaphs, patriarch's and metropolitan's, were authentic. From this observation, he concluded that the charter was fraudulent. He also conjectured that this deception by the patriarch was one of the things that led to his deposition in 1565, when the council found hin guilty of simony and machinations with church real estate (although he was not explicitly accused of forging a conciliar document).

Relatively recently, the opinion of V.E. Regel was independently challenged by B.L. Fonkich and K. Pitsakis. Konstantin Pitsakis drew attention to the fact that in the documents of the Patriarchate of Constantinople there are no traces of the this council, on behalf of which, this conciliar charter was allegedly issued, and it is obvious that the Greek bishops were entirely unaware of such council. Therefore, it is unlikely that the forgery committed by Patriarch Joasaph could play a role in his subsequent deposition. In 1593, the patriarch of Alexandria Melety Piga would send a royal crown to Tsar Feodor Ioannovich, with an implication that this is an act of royal crowning, albeit performed in absentia, which, according to the patriarch Meletios, was to be performed over the Russian Tsar for the first time; thus, Melety Piga, who was well-informed in the affairs of the Greek Patriarchate, did not know anything about the any prior conciliar blessing of the crowning of Ioann IV. Additionally, as Pitsakis pointed out, even after learning about forgery, the Greek bishops would not condemn their patriarch, since they considered such ways of working with the "barbarians" to be normal practice.

B. L. Fonkich confirmed the observations of V.E. Regel using new paleographic material, and improved dating of the "conciliar" letter, attributing it to December 1560, and not 1561, as was previously believeds by others, including K. Pitsakis himself (who in 1989 wasn't aware of Fonkich's publication from 1974). This, as we shall see, will be extremely important for the reconstruction of the circumstances of its creation. At the same time, Fonkich rejected the opinion of V.E. Regel that forged signatures automatically imply a falsification of the document. According to his observations, the bishops did not necessarily had to personally sign conciliar acts. For example, the conciliar decree of 1590, which established the Moscow Patriarchate, contained signatures of 106 bishops, of whom at least 65 were forged.

Finally, Dan Mureshan drew attention to the colophon of the manuscript of the so-called Slavonic-Romanian chronicle of monk Isaiah from Slatina that on January 1, 1561, Patriarch Joasaph was already in Moldova. This makes it almost impossible to attribute his creation of a document to December 1560 in Constantinople, that is, just a few weeks before. This is incompatible with the speed of movement of church delegations, and, most importantly, with the common tradtition of Greek church leaders to never go to the Balkans in winter, when the climatic conditions were so intolerable for them that they were a real risk to life. To be on January 1 in Moldova, the patriarch was to reach the Romanian principalities before the onset of the cold. Hence Muresan concludes that the charter itself was made in the Balkans, and therefore the Greek bishops couldn't know about it. Moldova was the ultimate goal of the Patriarch's journey, and his namesake Metropolitan of Euripus continued his journey through the Grand Duchy of Lithuania to Moscow.
Thus, as a conciliar certificate, our letter is still a forgery. Nevertheless, as K. Pitsakis has already noted, this does not mean that it must be considered counterfeit in all senses of the word. As a letter of the patriarch (not a conciliar one), it is still quite valid. We will see that the patriarch does not go anywhere beyond the powers that rightfully belong to him. If he really wanted to raise the Muscovite Tsar to the status of "Basileos Romeon", then the council of all the bishops of the patriarchate would be necessary. But the patriarch didn't attempt anything of the sort.


7. "Councilar" decree of 1560: contents

The "councilar" decree contains an explicit recognition of the crowning of 1547 as invalid, but immediately offers a solution to the problem. Interpretation of tha solution presents a challenge to historians, so we will examine it in detail. We note in advance that an unambiguous interpretation of the "conciliar" letter is possible only if one takes into account the contents of the three patriarchal letters accompanying it (something former researchers, as a rule, did not take into account). We will consider the "counciliar" text together with the contents of all three patriarchal letters sent with it.

First, we note right away that one of the three accompanying letters, dated November 1560, is a classic "cover letter" to an important document, and is the only one of the three that does not have independent significance, being a mere formality. In it, the patriarch informs in general terms about the processing of the "royal petition", avoiding concretizing what it consisted of. The rest of the letter contains generic fillers, good wishes and requests for charity. Moreover, patriarch pretends he's writing it from Constantinople during the council, where the bishops pray for the tsar's needs.

Let's now turn to the "conciliar" document directly. The letter begins with the fact that the "council" remembers the Byzantine royal roots of Tsar Ioann, and this justifies the desire of Metropolitan Macarius to crown him. However, the letter's tracing is markedly different from the one in tsar's version of the office of crowning. There is no genealogy of Russian princes from Caesar Augustus, but, instead, genealogy is traced from the Byzantine princess Anna, wife of Prince Vladimir. This immediately eliminates Moscow's claims to being a third and independent Rome, and reduces it to status of a derivative of the New Rome. Not to mention, the title of basileus in late Byzantium ceased to be exclusively the prerogative of the Byzantine emperor and could be used by other Christian princes - obviously, without any claim to the unique status of the Basileus of the Romans. The context, dictated by tracing the genealogy from princess Anna, only allows one interpretation of a title of basileus for the Moscow Tsar - secondary to the status of the Byzantine emperor. Recognizing the right to the title of basileus even for Russian princes, beginning with Vladimir, the letter sharply devalues this title itself, in comparison with Moscow's ambitions.
Nevertheless, the letter agrees with the desirability of erecting Ioann as a basileus. Further, the key paragraphs of the letter are presented in Table 3:

======================
..Therefore, led by this, reverend metropolitan of all great Russia kyr Macarius crowned him a king lawful and pious, and likewise asked of us to crown him a king lawful and pious, because what the aforementioned metropolitan of Moscow Macarius did, has no power... [since crowning is an exclusive prerogative of patriarchs in Rome or Constantinople].
======================
...our humility, and also a decision (γνώμῃ) of the reverend metropolitans and bishops of this council, by the action and grace (τῇ ἐνεργείᾳ καὶ χάριτι) of the all-holy and life-creating and mystical (τελεταρχικοῦ) Spirit, grants (ἐπιχορηγεῖ) the king and lord Ioann, the name of a lawful and pious king, crown by us, lawfully and ecclesiastically (ἐστεμμένον καὶ παρ’ ἡμῶν νομίμως ἅμα καὶ ἐκκλησιστικῶς).
======================

Once more - admitting the desirability of Ioann's elevation to kingship, the letter states to the impossibility of recognizing the actual performance of the ordination performed by Metropolitan Macarios to achieve this good goal. There's not even a slightest attempt at diplomatic softening of the wording: "...reverend metropolitan of all great Russia kyr Macarius crowned him a king lawful and pious, and likewise asked of us [καὶ ἡμεῖς ὁμοιοτρόπως ἀπῃτήθημεν"; here it may be more appropriate to translate, "demanded of us," see below], "...to crown him a king lawful and pious, because what the aforementioned metropolitan of Moscow Macarius did, has no power" (οὐκ ἰσχύει).
The phrase "has no power" unequivocally excludes the recognition of the act committed by Metropolitan Macarios. If something in the passage just cited can sweeten the pill, it is the use in the official document of the title "Metropolitan of Moscow". Now this is an unquestionable recognition of the existence of the Moscow metropolia, which - though still unclear in what capacity - is headed by Macarius. However dubious the status of Macarius is, it is clear that Moscow metropolia is separate and distinct (from Kiev). Except for the above-mentioned letter of patriarch Theolipt of 1516 - where, incidentally, the title of the head of the Moscow church remains unknown - we now for the first time see from Constantinople the recognition of the legitimacy of the metropolis of Moscow.
The passage cited above led many historians to believe that the "conciliar" charter hinted at the need for a re-crowning ceremony for the tsar - at the hands of the patriarch. As Kontantin Pitsakis observed, this reading of the charter is based on a misunderstanding of the text. This is evident, if only from the fact that in the final part of the charter the tsar is already called "God-crowned". The very text of the charter is designed so that the crowning, already performed by Macarius, can be considered "par fiction", as performed by the patriarch himself. The interpretation of Pitsakis was also supported by Dan Mureşan, who linked it with the actualization of the proposal for the recognition of the royal title of Ioann, which was already present in the counciliar charter of 1546.
Indeed, one can say a priori that the interpretation of Pitsakis and Mureshan corresponds to the general logic of church law, often incomprehensible to secular historians. This logic suggests that after the stabilization, which follows church divisions caused by schism or heresy, all the significant acts performed by the church organization that once "fell away" become retroactively valid. In church history, there are some exceptions to this rule, but they are always very noticeable and always required special substantiation (for example, the non-recognition of the iconoclastic clergy after the "Triumph of Orthodoxy" in 843, or the non-recognition of the hierarchy installed by the patriarch Euphemios, along with Euphemios himself, after Nicholas Mystic returned to his throne in 912). This norm of ecclesiastical law has never been explicitly formulated (for example, in canons), but existed in the field of precedents. The archetypical significance of this is the retroactive acknowledgement, under Theodosius the Great, of the Arian ecclesiastical organization (with all its clergymen, acts of ecclesiastical legislation and even cults, like that of the emperor Constantine).
Nevertheless, the idea of a repeated crowning is still voiced: "...asked of us to crown him a king...". Dan Muresan may be going too far, insisting on the semantic difference between the verb ἀπαιτέω used here and the verb αἰτέω: the latter would simply mean "asking", and the one that is used in the letter with the prefix ἀπο- has a stronger meaning of "asking for what is owed". Muresan believes that this is a requirement to fulfill the implicit promise of 1546 to recognize the crowning in the event of abandonment of illegal autocephaly. Patriarch Joasaph must have been perfectly aware of it, since his signature - as Metropolitan of Adrianople - was under the letter of 1546. It seems to me that the words of the "conciliar" charter "asked of us to" (even if their more exact translation - "we were asked persistently" or "demanded from us") should be understood literally. Literal interpretation here is possible - there are at least two different interpretations, and this ambiguity was possibly a deliberate move of the drafter of the charter: the subject of the "petition" here could then be both Moscow, and some other church community, represented by the bishops participating in the council (albeit fictitious).
As we know from the sources in Russian documents, there were no requests for a second consecration coming from Moscow; there couldn't be. However, the possibility of such an interpretation of the charter becomes a tool of diplomatic pressure (forced interpretation of the real request of the vis-à-vis negotiator, which puts him in an awkward position and gives an advantage in diplomatic bargaining). This technique allows one to formulate their real proposal in such a way that it looks lenient and merciful, so that the vis-à-vis negotiator would want to agree with the offer, lest the alternative will be worse. In fact, this is a veiled threat: "if you won't accept the terms below, we will escalate and even demand a re-crowning". The authors of the charter weren't risking to be caught on a lie by Moscow: after all, the most important in the Moscow petition was passed in 1557 only verbally (through Theodoret and metropolitan Joasaph), and Moscow had no way to check the accuracy of this transfer of royal petition. At the same time, the letter does not directly state what never happened - request by Moscow for a re-consecration: it can be understood as if it was the demand of the church community, that is, some ideas about the church order that should consistent with the decisions of the bishops.
After declaring that the crowning performed by Metropolitan Macarios was invalid, the letter goes on to explain the reasons why. This explanation actually corresponds to the church law - in this case, precedent law - but only in the sense that it existed in the Patriarchate of Constantinople: "... and not the metropolitan nor anyone else has power to perform such an act; even no other patriarch: for this power is given only to these patriarchs - of Rome and Constantinople." In other patriarchates, this question could be interpreted differently - and indeed it was, from time to time, by various rulers. That, of course, evoked constant objections from Constantinople. The question was, whether Metropolitan Macarius, being a schismatic, had the right to officiate at all, is diplomatically dispensed (however, it will be addressed in one of the accompanying letters).
Having outlined the legal-ecclesiastical impasse, into which Tsar Ioann was driven by metropolitan Macarius, the author of the charter sighs about the fact that Tsar Ioann, obviously, deserves to be crowned to his kingdom, and the patriarch would very much like to crown him.
And finally, a way out of the situation is proposed, which is formulated by means of a liturgical formula. As far as I know, it was not understood or at least correctly translated into any of the modern languages by any historian of the XIX-XX centuries, Here, not only the common in scientific circles insensitivity to liturgical matters is made manifest, but also the gap between the modern and medieval intuitive understanding of the philosophy of language.
We will try first to read and translate this main part of the "conciliar" charter:
... our humility, also by the decision (γνώμῃ) of the most reverend metropolitans and the most God-beloved bishops here, and by the action and grace [ῇῇ ἐνεργείᾳ καὶ χάριτι - the liturgical formula] of the all-Holy and Good and Life-creating and mysterious (tελεταρχικοῦ) Spirit offers [ἐπιχορηγεῖ - the term is often used for the gifts of the Spirit and often in the liturgical context] and gives the name of the king to lord Ioann, to be and be called a lawful and pious king, and crowned by us also, lawfully and ecclesiastically (ἐστεμμένον αὶ παρ 'ἡμῶν νομίμως ἅμα καὶ ἐκκλησιστικῶς)..
The "counciliar" letter itself constitutes the act of retroactive participation by Patriarch Joasaph in the crowning of Tsar Ioann and, therefore, a quasi-liturgical act: "our humility ... offers and gives ... to be and be called a king ... crowned by us also...". This is the literal meaning of the letter, which was acknowledged by Pitsakis and Muresan. The rest of the historians, apparently, read the same document, but could not believe their own eyes, and so tried to find more rational (from the modern point of view) explanations. But we will be interested in the logic of the authors of the document, which is no less rational than the logic of most historians; and it cerainly will lead us in a completely different direction.
The termin "mysterious" (τελεταρχικός) in the passage above comes from the word τελετή, meaning "church rite"; this termin is continually used in this meaning in a classical Byzantine treatise on sacraments - 'On church hierarchy' by Dopmisius the Areopagite, where he borrows heavily from the Proclus(a Neo-Platonist, in whose works it meant the initiation into mysteries). In later Byzantine times, the same termin ("sacrament") applied also to royal crownings. In the post-Byzantine period, a formative work on the subject was "Dialogue in Christ" by Simeon of Thessalonica († 1429), There, the office of crowning for a kingdom was considered within the sacrament of chrismation. The use of the term τελεταρχικός is intended to certify that the liturgical formula in the text of the letter is used for its direct purpose: by employing these words, the author of the letter took part in the crowning to the kingdom. The same is attested by the use of a conjunction, "and", in the words "and crowned by us also" - that is, now also by the patriarch, no longer by Metropolitan Macarius alone. This is important to note, because in the Slavonic translation, despite its inaccuracies, the general meaning of the text is conveyed correctly. Judging by that translation, Moscow understood that the patriarchal church is joining retroactively to the act of crowning to the kingdom, which took place without its participation. Moreover, this "retro" action has a very specific date - the date of the charter, December 1560.
This is where the letter ends, leaving the reader bewildered as to why the patriarch and the council decided that they had the right to take this retroactive part in a crowning, performed by a metropolitan of doubtful status. Such a right could arise only if the status of the metropolitan was corrected and the split was overcome. But the "conciliar" charter does not express itself directly on these topics - the patriarch left this discussion to special decree. Before turning our attention there, we will mention the purely philosophical aspect of the interpretation of the "conciliar" charter.
A liturgical formula, used in the quasi-liturgical context, is a statement that changes reality by the very act of its utterance. In our time, and outside the liturgical context, the set of such utterances is very limited, and therefore they tend to escape our attention. This is a special kind of illocutionary acts. For the first time, it was described by Searle within the framework of the theory of speech acts; he called them "declarations". An example of a "declaration" would be the following statement of the presenter: "I declare the meeting closed" - after this statement, the meeting will in fact be closed. But in medieval life even outside the context of worship such statements were much more common, since the idea of a person's ability to change reality with a word was generally accepted and extended to all areas of life. So the "word" of our "conciliar" letter was immediately "a matter", and it was hardly difficult for Moscow to understand this.


8. Charter defining the status of the Metropolitan of Moscow

The status of Metropolitan Macarius was to be determined retroactively, in a manner analogous to that for the status of his crowning of the tsar. Formal status of Metropolitan Macarius as of 1547 was still determined by the patriarchal letter of 1467, that is, he was under excommunication as a schismatic.
A patriarchal letter, the translation of which in the ambassadorial book follows immediately after the the "counciliar" charter, was specifically written to address the status of Macarius. The letter turned out to be quite long, full of various requests of a material nature. The diplomatic content of all three patriarchal letters was, as if by an accident, placed in the context of such requests, but the very number of letters corresponded exactly to the number of issues which were not to conflated, should they've been combined in a single text. Namely: a cover letter to the "counciliar" decree mentionined above, the status of Metropolitan Macarius (in the charter that we will consider now) and the reason for the communication failure in 1557 (in the charter that we will consider in the next section). A diplomatically significant part of the letter is presented in Table 4.

#########
And, in addition, it would be useful and in every way salvific, if by order of your kingship [i.e. yours], with the permission of the local most reverend Metropolitan lord Macarius, divine mysteries [i.e. the eucharistic liturgy] will be conducted and your kingdom will be blessed [i.e. you yourself] - as if from us, because he (Makarius) as a conciliar patriarchal exarch, has the power from us to conduct without fail everything that pertains to the office of a bishop.
#########

This formula put an end to the Moscow schism, and is therefore of utmost importance. Let's consider it in more detail.
The patriarch begins with a simple thought, which follows from the problem pointed out in the "conciliar" letter - if the crowning of 1547 is invalid, it would be proper to perform another, valid crowning. However, there is no obligation: "it would be useful and in every way salvific" - this is not the same as "absolutely necessary". After all, even in the case of a re-crowning, Makarius would have made him "as if from us", that is, in the name of the patriarch. But, as we already know from the "counciliar" letter, this "as if from us" can easily be attributed to the liturgical action accomplished earlier. But here comes the most important question: on what grounds? The problem is not whether to hold a crowning again, or to backdate the reality that has already been accomplished, but that both these options should presuppose the right of Metropolitan Makarius to act "as if from" the name of the patriarch. A right he initially did not possess, since he was inthroned in a schism (and therefore crowning done by him in 1547 "has no power").
The patriarchal letter finally provides a canonically clear answer on the present status of Metropolitan Macarius - and the letter itself defines this status (another illocutionary act, of the "declaration" type by Searle): "... he (Makarius) as a conciliar patriarchal exarch (ὡς ἔξαρχος πατριαρχικὸς καθολικός ), has the power from us to conduct everything that pertains to the office of a bishop... "
The term "exarch" used here implies the administrative subordination of the metropolitan of Moscow to the patriarch. The idea of an autocratic Moscow autocephaly is thus finished. To ensure the point is clear, the patriarch explains this by saying that only from him - and not by himself - Macarius has the power to act as a bishop ("... has the power from us ... to conduct everything pertaining to an office of a bishops ...").
The term "counciliar patriarchal exarch" used in the document has a very clear meaning in the late Byzantine church law. It appears in documents starting from the XIV century, and wasn't restricted only to bishops; the meaning always was of an administrator presiding over other administrators, who was to respond directly to the patriarch only. When applied to a bishop, it designated the leading bishop of some area of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, having administrative rights, with regards to other bishops of the same region, similar (but not identical!) to those of a patriarch. It can be said that this is analogous to the title of a metropolitan in its classical understanding - as the head of the metropolitan district, including several dioceses with bishops at the head of each. Since the meaning of the term "metropolitan" in late Byzantine Empire became blurred, while the reality of the metropolies themselves in many cases preserved, a new name was adopted for the head of the metropolia.
So, the abolition of Moscow autocephaly was accomplished, and no recognition of the Moscow tsar as a "Basileos Romeon" was offered in return. The Moscow authorities can not dispute this, since the abandonment of autocephaly was now tied up with the very recognition of the royal crowning.
This could be the end of the diplomatic negotiations, but Patriarch Joasaph did not want to leave any inconsistencies behind (potential cards for Moscow to play in any future negotiations), and therefore in the last letter he returns to the topic of the negotiations of 1557, where the king receive a promised - only in words - something quitedifferent. He needed to show that he didn't break his his own promise, but rather Moscow itself is to blame for not being able to find sensible negotiators.
